# Messaging and Workers

Web messaging and web workers are different APIs but all have the same communication API, which is why I will discuss them together. Only the Messaging API is part of the official HTML5 spec, but both of these APIs are valuable additions to any web application.

Messaging allows applications to send messages from one domain to another, something that Ajax security policies have long prevented for good reason, but is now starting to open up with the right security measurements in place.


It also includes progress events for monitoring uploads.

> The new `XMLHttpRequest` [Level 2 object](http://www.w3.org/TR/ XMLHttpRequest2/), out of scope for this book but already in WebKit and Firefox, supports cross-domain requests (with the right level of server security).

Browsers are effectively single-threaded applications, in that when JavaScript is running or perhaps being parsed, the page isn't rendering. Equally, when JavaScript is performing a long and complicated function, the whole browser can be seen to lock up. What a Web Worker does is introduce a simplified idea of threads for browsers. A worker allows me to ring-fence a particular block of code and it will run without affecting the browser at all in a new, concurrent thread of operation, allowing the main browser thread to continue uninterrupted.

## Chit chat with the Messaging API

I wanted to show you the Messaging API first because the Web Worker, `WebSocket`, and Server-Sent Event APIs (the latter two discussed in the next chapter) all use this common method of communication. So think of this as your gentle primer on communication.

The Messaging API has very good support across all browsers--yes, including Internet Explorer (IE)--and offers a simple API for posting plain text messages from one origin (or domain, to you and me) to another. For example, if you want to send some information to a window you have in an iframe, you can do it using the Messaging API. This will still work if the window is on a completely different domain than the site hosting the iframe.

### Sending messages across domains

If Bruce has a document that wants to communicate with my document--say either in an iframe or perhaps in a pop-up window--it needs a reference to the window object (of my document) and he can then call the __postMessage__ method to pass some message to it. The JavaScript in Bruce's document will look like this:

```js
var t = document.getElementsByTagName('iframe')[0];
t.contentWindow.postMessage('favourite instrument?',
  'http://brucelawson.co.uk');
```

The target origin being passed to `postMessage` in the second argument is required, and it must match the origin of your `contentWindow` object (the target window, my document in this example). If the origins don't match, a security error will be thrown, stopping the script from continuing. If the origin isn't passed in, the JavaScript will throw a syntax error--not helpful, but something to watch out for if you forget. One last tip: Remember to wait for the target to finish loading. The target is still a document that needs to be parsed and loaded. If the browser hasn't loaded the document and you try to send it a message, the JavaScript will fail entirely with a similar syntax error.

My document is being referenced via an iframe on Bruce's page, and it contains the following JavaScript:

> This code list uses `addEventListener` rather than onmessage because previous versions of Firefox didn't appear to respond to onmessage on the window object. This is best practice anyway, but it would mean we also need to hook IE using `attachEvent`, which I've not included in my example.

```js
window.addEventListener('message', function (event) {
  if (event.data == 'favourite instrument?') {
    if (event.origin == 'http://remysharp.com') {
      event.source.postMessage('brand new clarinet', event.origin);
    } else if (event.origin == 'http://brucelawson.co.uk') {
      event.source.postMessage('rusty old trombone', event.origin);
    }
  }
}, false);
```

My script sets an event listener for messages being passed to the window. Inside the event object is a data property containing the message that was sent. Along with the data property, there are a number of other useful properties sitting inside the event: origin and source.

The event.origin gives me the domain that the message came from. I can use this, as I have in the previous code listing, to determine whether I want to process the message. This is policy control at a very rudimentary level.

The event.source points back to the window object making the original call to my document, that is, Bruce's document. This is useful to be able to communicate back and forth. Of course, your onmessage event handler could do a lot more, like make an Ajax request to the server on the same domain.

### What about sending more than strings?

In the examples I've shown you so far, I've passed only strings in messages back and forth. What if you want to send more than just a string? What if you have an object with properties and values?

Well, the good news is the specification describes what's supposed to happen when a browser has to safely send data from one source to another. It describes how to clone the data and how it should be treated.

However, most browsers don't support this process. In fact, most browsers simply coerce the object into a string. That sucks for you and me. It means that instead of the nicely constructed object, you'll get `[object Object]` in the event.data property. In fact, we saw this before in Chapter 6, "Data Storage," where we try to store objects in `localStorage`. So in the same way we got around the issue with `localStorage`, you can use `JSON.stringify` to convert your JavaScript object into a string, pass it to `postMessage`, and then, on the receiving side, convert it back to a native JavaScript object using `JSON.parse`.

Using `JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse` will be useful methods for transferring more complicated objects from window to target, as we'll see in the next section on Web Workers (and the next chapter on `WebSockets` and Server-Sent Events).

## Threading using Web Workers

Web Workers are part of a separate specification to the HTML5 spec, but they are a key feature in building web applications.

A worker is a way of running a discrete block of JavaScript in a background process to the main browser. This is effectively a thread. What this means is that the worker runs in the background without interfering with the main browser thread.

The browser is already responsible for requesting and parsing files, rendering the view, and executing JavaScript, running the UI/chrome, and anything that consumes the browser's processing time causes all other jobs to wait. This is where Web Workers come to the rescue.

### Why use a worker?

If you've ever written any dodgy JavaScript that goes haywire, causing your browser to start fuming like it's about to explode, then you've experienced the single-threadedness of browsers. Eventually, if the browser's smart, it'll give you the option to terminate the dodgy code, something like Figure 10.1.

{{figure 10.1
Figure 10.1 Some browsers will interrupt JavaScript that's gone wild, and give you the option to nuke it into space.
}}

More worrying, though, are the much more subtle issues. Say you've written the latest and greatest web application that does the most amazing photo manipulation. You're using all the l33t skills you learnt from this book--canvas, storage, offline applications--but when it comes to adding a photo filter, it takes 30 seconds. It's not the 30 seconds that's the problem; it's the fact that your user can't do anything in the browser for those 30 seconds. What if your user changed her mind and wanted to cancel the filter? Obviously this is a situation you want to avoid.

This scenario is perfect for a Web Worker because all the filter processing can happen in the background, and the main browsing window--and the rest of your web application--is left alone to continue to be responsive to your visitor's requests.

### Creating and working with workers

You can test for Web Worker support by checking whether or not the object is undefined:

```js
if (typeof Worker != "undefined") {
  // do the jazzy stuff
}
```

Now that we know we've got support (Safari, Safari Mobile, Chrome, Opera, Firefox, and IE10 all support Web Workers) we can go about creating a new worker:

```js
var worker = new Worker('my_worker.js');
```

A new worker object is fired up, reads in the my_worker.js JavaScript file, and is now happily running and ready to be used.

At this point, you'd be forgiven for thinking that you can call methods inside the worker from your document, and that data can be returned from the worker to your document. Poppycock! No, in fact, to work with a worker, everything must be communicated through posting messages between the worker and your document. It's like some scene from Romeo and Juliet, exchanging letters of love between the browser and the worker.

The only way you get can information to the worker is via `postMessage`:

```
worker.postMessage('hello worker!');
```

Note that the `postMessage` in the Web Workers, unlike `postMessage` in the Messaging API, only requires a single argument. The only way you can receive information from the worker is via the onmessage event handler:

```js
worker.onmessage = function (event) {
  alert('The worker just sent me this: ' + event.data);
};
```

You should now be recognising the `postMessage`/`onmessage` combination from the Messaging API from earlier in this chapter. You remember how we can only send and receive strings in the Messaging API? You won't be surprised to know, then, that the Web Workers have the same constraint.

Equally, the code inside the worker must also communicate using the `postMessage`/`onmessage` combo. However, a Web Worker doesn't have the same access as your normal document: It's very much sandboxed and has access to only a select few APIs and functions, as I'll show you in the next section.

The only other method available to you via the worker object is terminate, which does exactly what it says on the tin. The worker ceases to run and the worker object becomes limp and useless. In particular, you can't resume the worker; you'd have to create a brand new one.

### What you can do inside a worker

Within a Web Worker you don't have access to such pleasures as the DOM. In fact, if you need to do anything with the DOM, you're going to have to prepare the work in the worker, and then pass it to the parent document to do the actual DOM manipulation.

> Currently there are no Web Worker implementations that support accessing IndexedDB, though there are fixes in the works. In the first edition of this book, it was Web SQL Databases that weren't supported; since that's changed, and the IndexedDB spec is still fairly new, I'd expect support to come fairly quickly once IndexedDB implementations have settled down.

However, there are a number of things you can do in a worker (according to the specification):

- `postMessage` and listen for inbound messages via onmessage close, to end the current worker
- Set event listeners
- `XMLHttpRequest`, for Ajax requests
- Timers, such as `setTimeout`, `setInterval`, and their clearing counterparts
- All the core JavaScript functions: eval, `isNaN`, escape, and so on. Location object, the href of the worker script
- `WebSockets` (which we'll discuss in the next chapter)
- `EventSource` (also in the next chapter)
- Web SQL Databases (only implemented in Safari and Chrome) IndexedDB
- Web Workers
- `importScripts`
The following code is all I need in `my_worker.js` to communicate with the document from the earlier code listing:

```js
this.onmessage = function (event) {
  if (event.data == "hello worker!") {
    postMessage("hello there, right back at you");
  } else {
    postMessage("Can't you see I'm busy, leave me alone");
  }
};
```

It's useful to know that, in a normal document, this keyword would refer to the global scope, the window object. Here in the worker, the global scope is the worker instance. It also means that the this keyword inside of `setTimeout` and `setInterval` is the worker instance (where this would otherwise be the window object).

In these examples so far, our worker hasn't done anything particularly special. How about a worker that searches for prime numbers? This requires a super tight loop in JavaScript constantly spinning around looking for values that match a prime. All this and at the same time allowing your visitor to draw on a canvas while your app searches for prime numbers? Perhaps a strange use case, but we have workers to come to your rescue.

The main document will handle starting the worker and drawing on the canvas. The only code that's offloaded to the worker is the prime number searching.

```js
var worker = new Worker('prime.js'),
    prime = document.getElementById('prime');

worker.onmessage = function(event) {
  prime.innerHTML = event.data;
};
```

The page continues to handle mousedown, mousemove, and mouseup events to draw on a canvas on the page. Inside the prime.js script we have:

```
onmessage = function (event) {
  // doesn't matter what the message is, just start the job
  run();
};

function run() {
  var n = 1;
  search: while (true) {
    n += 1;
    for (var i = 2; i <= Math.sqrt(n); i += 1)
      if (n % i == 0) continue search;
    // found a prime!

    postMessage(n);
  }
}
```

When the prime.js worker receives any message, it starts the prime number search. When you run this prime number drawing extravaganza of an application, everything runs smoothly, and you're able to create your perfect work of art whilst also searching for primes as seen in Figure 10.2.

{{figure 10.2
Figure 10.2 Everything you could ever need: prime number and drawing executed without interruption thanks to Web Workers.
}}

### Matryoshka dolls: workers inside workers

If you had a watchful eye, you would have spotted that you can also create new workers from within a worker. Currently, only Firefox and Opera support this, but it's part of the spec, so you should expect that other browsers will be updated to include this feature.

What this means is that you could spawn one worker, which then goes and splits its job into lots of delegated little jobs and passes them to sub-workers. Let's go back to the example of applying a complex filter to a photo in your super-sexy online image web app. To speed up the processing of the image--assuming it made sense in the filter--you could split the image up into regions and pass each region of image data to a sub-worker.

As each worker returns, you reduce the pending count and, once all the workers have finished, the main worker returns the final processed image data to the parent document. It looks something like this (I've left out some functions from the listing as this is just to demonstrate the idea):

```
var pendingWorkers = 0,
    results = {},

workingWidth = 100;
onmessage = function (event) {
  var imageData = JSON.parse(event.data),
  worker = null;
  pendingWorkers = getNumberOfWorkers(imageData.width
                    / workingWidth);

  // reset any old results
  results = {};

  for (var i = 0; i < pendingWorkers; i++) {
    worker = new Worker('photofilter.js');
    worker.postMessage(JSON.stringify({
      imageData: imageData,
      x: i * workingWidth,
      width: workingWidth
    }));

    worker.onmessage = storeResult;
  }
};

function storeResult(event) {
  var result = JSON.parse(event.data);
  buildUpImageData(result);
  pendingWorkers--;

  if (pendingWorkers <= 0) {
    postMessage(JSON.stringify(results));
  }
}
```

When the message is received from the sub-worker, the main worker above decreases the number of outstanding sub-workers. Once all the sub-workers have returned their slice of the image data, the final result is returned to the parent document.

The photofilter.js sub-worker would contain the following code to process just a small region of the image data:

```
onmessage = function (event) {
  var data = JSON.parse(event.data);

  // perform some amazing feat of image processing
  var imageData = amazingImageProcess(data.imageData,
                    data.x, data.width);

  postMessage(JSON.stringify({
    imageData: imageData,
    x: data.x
  }));

  // self close
  close();
};
```

Notice also how `photofilter.js`, once it's done performing its task, calls the `close()` method. This allows the worker to terminate itself, since it's no longer needed.

### Importing scripts and libraries to your worker

The concept of Web Workers is very much about modularising a block of code or functionality and running it in a standalone environment (that is, the worker itself). But Web Workers can also load external JavaScript files and libraries via the `importScripts` method.

This is one of the few worker-specific methods. It accepts a list of URLs and loads them into the worker synchronously. You can load one script at a time, or you can load multiple scripts from within the worker:

```
importScripts('xhr.js');
importScripts('prime.js', 'number_crunch.js', 'captain_crunch.js');
```

Each script is processed one at a time. The script must be on the same origin as the worker--the same domain, cname, and so on. The worker then synchronously loads the JavaScript into itself, returning to continue only once the script has finished processing.

## Sharing the load with `SharedWorkers`

Another type of Web Worker is the `SharedWorker`, currently supported only in Chrome, Safari, and Opera. A shared worker is pretty much like an average Web Worker except that multiple documents can access the same instance of the worker. This means that if you have several pop-ups or several iframes, all those documents can access this single shared worker and this single shared worker will serve all those documents.

This would be useful, for example, for applications like Gmail or Facebook, where client-side data needs to be maintained, such as messages for the user, and you have several different windows open.

The worker can access and manage the website's client-side Web SQL Databases and IndexedDB (both discussed in Chapter 6).

It can also maintain the connection with the server, handling all the data that's coming in and out--perhaps even via a `WebSocket` to the server, as we'll see in the next chapter--so that data is handled in real time. The shared worker can then maintain all the changes to the client-side messages database and push all those updates via `postMessage` to each of the pop-ups, iframes, and so on.

This means that there's no chance of data getting out of sync-- or chance of race conditions if each of the pop-ups, iframes, and so on was individually connecting to the server and trying to each manage the client side--since the shared worker is the single point of contact for all of that type of work.

The `SharedWorker` works slightly differently when it comes to communication. For starters there's the concept of ports--this is an array-like object that contains a reference to each of the communication channels the shared worker has. Also, if you bind to the message event using `addEventListener`, you have to manually start the worker, which I'll show you in the following code sample.

In addition, within the worker the connect event fires when the `SharedWorker` is created, which can be used to keep track of how many connections the worker has to other documents.

The documents creating the `SharedWorker` contain the following code:

```js
var worker = new SharedWorker('messages.js');
worker.port.addEventListener('message', function(event) {
  var messages = JSON.parse(event.data);
  showNewMessages(messages);
}, false);
worker.port.start();
```

In the preceding code block, you can see we're accessing the worker via the port property. This is how you interact and, in fact, distinguish between shared and nonshared workers. As the example binds to the message event using `addEventListener`, the worker must be connected manually using the .start() method. The code wouldn't need this if it used onmessage.

Next is the `messages.js` worker:

```js
importScripts('xhr.js');
importScripts('database.js');

var connections = [];
onconnect = function(event) {
  connections.push(event.ports[0]);
}

var xhr = new XHR('/get-new-messages');
xhr.oncomplete = function (messages) {
  database.updateMessages(messages);
  for (var i = 0; i < connections.length; i++) {
    connections[i].postMessage(JSON.stringify(messages));
  }

  xhr.send(); // causes us to loop forever
};

xhr.send();
```

When a client document connects to the worker, the connect event is fired, which allows me to capture the connection port. This is collected through the `event.ports[0]` reference, even though there will never be more than one item inside the ports property. However, the worker reference is inside this, so we can use this to post messages and receive messages.

As you see in the previous example, when the Ajax oncomplete function runs, I loop through all the connected ports and send them each a message of the new email messages that have come in. This way the connected clients act as dumb terminals, oblivious to any of the real work going on to store the messages in the client-side database.

{{figure 10.3
Figure 10.3 Check the Debug check box to allow the developer to run console.log inside a Web Worker.
}}

### Debugging a worker

We've gotten to the point in web development where the tools for debugging are so much better than ten years ago. All the latest browsers come with their own JavaScript debugger (though Firefox still requires Firebug as a plugin); it's a haven of debugging when compared to the bad old days of using alert boxes left, right, and centre.

While with a Web Worker, now you're working in a sandboxed environment, so there is no access to the console debuggers. There's no native way to do console.log("who's the daddy?") in a worker. To compound this hurdle, there's not even an alert box we can use.

However! There is hope yet. The WebKit folks have kindly thought about this problem, and in the scripts panel the developer tools offer a debug checkbox next to Web Workers (in both Chrome and Safari). This changes how Web Workers actually run (behind the scenes they're running in a `setTimeout`), but it does mean you can include console.log in your code to help you debug as seen in Figure 10.3.

It's great that Chrome and Safari have debugging tools, but what if you want to debug in Firefox, too? You'll need to create your own system for posting debug messages. However, as with all communications from your worker--be it a debug message or results from a worker's delegated tasks--you'll need to have some agreed language between your workers and your main document to differentiate between each of those different message types, and this will depend entirely on your application. For instance, you could prefix debug messages with the keyword "log:"

```js
importScripts('xhr.js');
var xhr = new XHR('/someurl');
xhr.oncomplete = function (data) {
  log('data contains ' + data.length + ' items');
};

xhr.send();

function log(msg) {
  postMessage('log ' + msg);
}
```

Note that xhr.js is my made-up `XMLHttpRequest` script that returns me some JSON data--you'll have to make your own!

In the main page in the onmessage event, I'll be looking for prefixes in messages and actioning them:

> It's possible for a worker to get aborted or terminated through a method unknown to your code. If your worker is being killed off by the browser for some reason, then the `worker.onerror` event is going to fire. If you're closing the worker manually, you're having to do this from within the worker via `.close()` so you have the opportunity to notify the connected documents that your worker is closing.

```js
var worker = new Worker('xhr_thang.js');
worker.onmessage = function (event) {
  var data = event.data.split(' '),
  action = data.shift(), // grab the first word
  msg = data.join(' '); // put the message back together

  if (action == 'log') {
    console.log(msg);
  } else {
    // some other action
  }
};
```

In this example, my agreed grammar is that all messages are prefixed with an action. This could be log, set, run, or some other action. What's important is that I now have a way to inspect data that's inside the worker by sending data to my log function when I'm not testing in Safari or Chrome.

{{figure 10.4
Figure 10.4 A demo console to inspect inside a Web Worker.
}}

It's also useful to be able to poke around inside a worker, something I've found to be exceptionally useful when experimenting in JavaScript. In a nonworker environment, I can pop open my console of choice (Firebug or Dragonfly, for example) and from within there, I can log out and inspect all the properties on the window object, the document, and then their properties, just to see what's supported and what I can play with. Since a worker is a closed environment, I need to do this manually. So one of the online examples for this book includes a console that allows you to inspect a Web Worker and test code inside the worker and see what it produces. You can see the [worker console online](http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch10/echo.html) (Figure 10.4).

## Summary

There are a number of APIs that use similar messaging techniques--we'll cover more in the next chapter. Once you've got your head around all the different ways you can communicate within your web app, you have all the tools at your disposal to create multi-threaded, multi-window, cross-domain thingamajigs.

Web Workers absolutely provide what has been eagerly awaited: the ability to run background JavaScript jobs that don't lock your user out of a browsing experience. Now that you've seen that it's easy-peasy, I'm confident your websites will be safe from the beach ball of death!