# Real Time

The real-time web is one of those golden eggs of the Internet. Very cool when you come across it, but perhaps quite daunting when it comes to building it. This chapter will show you the choices of technology and how spectacularly simple the client-side code is.

There are two options to add a real-time aspect to your web application: Websockets and Server-Sent Events. WebSockets let you create a connected stream to your server (for server boffins out there: a TCP connection), and allow two-way, real-time communication between the server and the client. The typical hello world app is a chat client, but the possibilities of use are endless. Sockets go a long way toward replacing Comet-based code. Comet uses a variety of--often quite hackish--techniques to achieve real-time, streaming data from a server. WebSockets simplify this process on the client side, as we'll see later in this chapter.

Server-Sent Events, also known as `EventSource`, push messages sent in real time from the server to the browser client. These are perfect for applications that need information from a server without necessarily having to wait for any user interaction or input, like streaming prices or live chart updates, or live information that you're monitoring.

## WebSockets: working with streaming data


The WebSockets specification is one of the shiniest new APIs outside the realm of HTML5, but it's actually really important for some of the real-time-based web applications that have emerged recently.

WebSockets give you a bidirectional connection between your server and the browser. This connection is also real time and is permanently open until explicitly closed. This means that when the server wants to send your client something, that message is immediately pushed to your browser.

This is what Comet succeeded in doing. Comet created a realtime connection to your server, but it would do it using a variety of different hacks. Ultimately, if none of these hacks worked, it would eventually fall back down to Ajax polling, which would constantly hit your server and that doesn't scale up very well.

> If the browser doesn't natively support WebSockets, you can fake it using Flash. Visit [github.com/gimite/web-socket-js](https://github.com/gimite/web-socket-js) to see Hiroshi Ichikawa's Flashbased polyfill for WebSockets.

If you have a socket open, your server can push data to all those connected sockets, and the server doesn't have to constantly respond to inbound Ajax requests. This is the move from polling to pushing, from reactive to proactive. This is what Comet was achieving through hacks, and this is what WebSockets achieve natively in the browser.

### Sockets solve latency of real-time applications

Low latency is a massive benefit of WebSockets. Since your socket is always open and listening, as soon as data is pushed from the server, it just has to make its way to your browser, making the latency exceptionally low in comparison to something like an `XMLHttpRequest`-based ajax request.

> Regarding the `ws://` server protocol, writing about how to set up the server side is beyond the scope of this book, but there are already several libraries out in the wild that can add the WebSocket protocol to your existing setup. Using servers like Node.js, I was able to get a WebSocket server up and running in around 20 minutes. Visit [remysharp.com/slicehost-nodejs-websockets/](http://remysharp.com/slicehost-nodejs-websockets/) to see how I documented the process.

To take something like Google Wave--the now defunct realtime web-based email and collaboration tool--as an example,

if you have lots of people all in the same document, and you're all typing, you want to send all those keystrokes to all the connected people as soon as the keystrokes happen. However, if you're using vanilla Ajax to do that, you would have to create a new XHR object every time a key is hit, and every one of those requests will contain all the headers that are sent with a normal XHR request--like the user agent string, the referrer URL, the accepted content type, and so on. That's a lot of data for what was essentially a single keypress.

With sockets, on the other hand, because the connection is always open, you need only send the information about the keystroke, which would then be disseminated to all the connected clients via the server, and only that single piece of information would be sent.

The data sent has gone from Ajax--which will be perhaps 200–300 bytes of data--to a socket connection, which will be just a few--around 10–20 bytes of data--making our application much more responsive, with faster transfer around the connected sessions.

### The simple WebSocket API

The WebSocket API is also exceptionally easy to work with. Currently, browsers only support sending strings (with the exception of Firefox and Web Workers), which we've seen in Chapter 10 with the Messaging API and Web Workers using `postMessage` and `onmessage`. Sockets work in almost exactly the same way.

This means that you can't (currently) send binary data--but I'd argue that in the web world we're used to working with JSON and it's not a particularly big deal to encode to JSON as the messages come in from a socket, since we're already doing it for JSON Ajax requests.

The API is limited to the essential methods for creating the connection, sending data down the socket, receiving, and closing the socket. There's also an error handler and a state flag, which tells our app if the socket is currently connecting, open, closing, or closed. Once you've closed a socket, it can't be reopened, so you'll need to create a new socket.

Creating a new WebSocket is easy and very much like creating a new Web Worker. The protocol of the URL must be ws:// but the rest of the URL can be structured just as you would a normal URL, to be:

```js
var socket = new WebSocket('ws://myserver.com/tweets:8080/');
```

For this example, I'm going to be listening only to the messages that come from the tweets URL. Each is a new tweet from Twitter that my server has been set up to listen for (Figure 11.1).

{{figure 11.1
Figure 11.1 A streaming connection showing tweets that my server was listening for.
}}

The messages from the server are being delivered as JSON messages, forwarded on from Twitter's streaming API. So when they come in, I'll convert the JSON to data and render the tweet on the screen:

> The URL that you use for the WebSocket doesn't have to be the same origin as your document. This means you can connect to servers from third-party services, which expands the possibilities of what can be done.

```js
socket.onmessage = function(event) {
  var tweetNode = renderTweet(JSON.parse(event.data));
  document.getElementById('tweets').appendChild(tweetNode);
};
```

Now in as many as four lines of JavaScript (excluding the `renderTweet` function, which just massages the incoming parsed JSON data into a workable HTML fragment to append to the page), I've got streaming real-time tweets on my page.

### Doing more than listening with a socket

As I said before, there are more methods available on a socket than just listening. Since a chat application is the hello world of Comet, I felt it only fair to show you a simple example of what chat would look like using WebSockets:

```js
var socket = new WebSocket("ws://my-chat-server.com:8080/"),
    me = getUsername();

socket.onmessage = function(event) {
  var data = JSON.parse(event.data);
  if (data.action == 'joined') {
    initiliseChat();
  } else {
    showNewMessage(data.who, data.text);
  }
};

socket.onclose = function () {
  socket.send(JSON.stringify({
    action: 'logoff',
    username: me
  }));

  showDisconnectMsg();
};

socket.onopen = function() {
  socket.send(JSON.stringify({
    action: 'join',
    username: me
  }));
};
```

This simple pseudo code shows you how the same techniques we used in the Message API can help with getting around the limitations of plain text. The WebSocket API really is as simple as that. All the negotiation is done out of sight by the browser for you; all the buffering is done for you (though you can check the current `bufferedAmount` on the socket). In fact, the communication process is even easier than setting up an XHR object!

## Server-Sent Events

These are situations where you want to have simple push-based messages that come from the server. Server-Sent Events are well suited to applications like real-time price updates, or latest headlines, or some real-time, one-way information that needs to get to the browser. If you instead need real-time, two-way communication, you want WebSockets as we saw earlier in this chapter.

Server-Sent Events come through the `EventSource` object. They're quite similar to WebSockets in their use. You create a new `EventSource`, passing it a URL to connect to. The browser immediately begins to establish a connection.

The `EventSource` object has a few simple events:

- Open: when the connection has been established
- Message: when a new message comes in--the event's data property contains the raw message
- Error: if something goes wrong

What makes `EventSource` unique is the way it handles dropped connections and message tracking.

If the `EventSource` connection is dropped for any reason, the API automatically tries to connect. If you use message IDs, when the `EventSource` reestablishes its connection it will tell the server which message ID it last saw. This allows the server (if your application requires it) to easily send the client the backlog of messages it missed.

Say for instance you had created a real-time charting application that tracked every time Bruce mentions his favourite pink cuddly toy on Twitter. This charting app will plot Bruce's sentiment against the current time--so you know if he's happy with the colour, texture, and general feel of the thing or not.

Since the browser just needs to passively receive data from the server, Server-Sent Events are a good match.

Now let's assume that while you're carefully monitoring Bruce's adorations on your app, you lose the connection. When you return online, `EventSource` will tell the server that the last message ID was 69; the server is now up to message ID 78. So the application on the server realises that you've missed a bunch of messages, and the server will send back all the messages from 70 onwards. Your client code doesn't change in any way, since each of those missing eight messages will just trigger the message event, and everything will be plotted accordingly.

Here's an example of said application:

```js
var es = new EventSource('/bruces-pink-toy');
es.onopen = function () {
  initialiseChart();
};

es.onmessage = function (event) {
  var data = JSON.parse(event.data);
  chart.plot(data.time, data.sentiment);
};
```

{{aside

# Server-Side Events--the server side technology

On the server side, you could use a PHP-based setup (LAMP for instance), but since Apache (the A in LAMP) doesn't support persistent connections very well, it will keep dropping the connection, and the `EventSource` will keep on reconnecting automatically. This will effectively result in something more akin to an Ajax polling application.

This isn't the best way of doing things, but I appreciate that PHP probably has the lowest barrier of entry for most of us, so knowing that it can still work is useful. To take real advantage of the `EventSource`, you need a persistent connection to the server, and your typical LAMP setup isn't going to cut it.

You can, and probably should, opt for an event-based server. Going into great detail about this is way beyond the scope of this book, but I'd recommend looking at Node.js (a JavaScript-based server platform) or something like Twisted for Python.

}}

The server needs to keep the connection open to the client, and it must send the client a header with the mime type text/event-stream.

The server needs to send new messages as such:

```
id: 1\n
data: { "semiment": "like", "time": "2011-06-23 16:43:23"}\n\n
```

Two new lines indicate the end of the message. If we were sending just plain sentences (rather than JSON in Bruce's case), the API supports sending multiple lines as such:

```
data: Here's my first really, really, really long line, but -\n
data: I've not just finished there, I've got more to say.\n\n
data: Since I follow two blank lines, I'm an entirely new message\n\n
```

In the example above, only two messages would be sent. Also notice that I'm not using any IDs either--they're not mandatory, but if you want to support the picking up where you dropped off feature, you'll want to include the IDs.

### A simple EventSource server

What follows is some very simple Node.js code to accept connections to an `EventSource`-based server and send messages. Again, it's beyond the scope of this book to explain the server logic, but it should give you a starting point. I've also simplified the solution so the server just notifies connected users about the user agent string of other visitors that are currently connected to the same service. We'll keep Bruce's special toy charting experiment for another day!

```js
/** When they create a new Event Source */
response.writeHead(200, {
  'Content-Type': 'text/event-stream',
  'Cache-Control': 'no-cache'
});

// get the last event id and coerce to a number
var lastId = req.headers['last-event-id']*1;
if (lastId) {
  for (var i = lastId; i < eventId; i++) {
    response.write('data: ' +
      JSON.stringify(history[eventId]) +
      '\nid: ' +
      eventId +
      '\n\n'
    );
  }
}

// finally cache the response connection
connections.push(response);

/** When a regular web request is received */

connections.forEach(function (response) {
  history[++eventId] = {
    agent: request.headers['user-agent'],
    time: +new Date
  };

  response.write('data: ' +
    JSON.stringify(history[eventId]) +
    '\nid: ' +
    eventId + '\n\n'
  );
});
```

My client-side code looks like this:

```js
var es = new EventSource('/eventsource');
es.onmessage = function (event) {
  var data = JSON.parse(event.data);
  log.innerHTML += '<li><strong>' +
    data.agent +
    '</strong><br> connected at <em>' +
    (new Date(data.time)) +
    '</em></li>';
};
```

A very simple application, but behind the scenes all the hard work happens thanks to real-time, push-based events from the server.

### Implementation support

Support isn't too bad for `EventSource`. Chrome, Safari, Firefox, and Opera handle it just fine, while--at the time of writing, at least--whether or not IE10 will support `EventSource` sadly remains a mystery (but I still have every faith). However, because `EventSource` reverts to polling, it's very simple to replicate this API to create a polyfill using JavaScript and Ajax (you can see a few examples online here: [github.com/Modernizr/Modernizr/wiki/HTML5-Cross-browser-Polyfills](https://github.com/Modernizr/Modernizr/wiki/HTML5-Cross-browser-Polyfills under "EventSource").

One thing I've noticed is that if you create a new `EventSource` during or immediately after the page has loaded, some browsers will keep their "loading throbber" running, making it look like the page has more to load even when that's no longer the case. I'm unclear if this is a bug in the implementations or if it's a specially crafted feature to keep us developers on our toes, but I've found that simply waiting for the document to finish

## Summary

loading and then wrapping your `EventSource` initialisation code in a `setTimeout(init, 10)` helps to avoid that unsightly and nasty throbber.

This chapter has equipped you with the very best in buzzword compliancy: real time. At the same time, adding a real-time dimension to your website could give you the competitive edge, and now that you've seen how easy the JavaScript is, I expect it's hard to resist. Obviously there is some server-side hickery pokery to be done, but once that's in place, you'll quickly be able to attract all those short attention span users. Now go build something a-maze-zing.