# Polyfilling: Patching Old Browsers to Support HTML5 Today

So, thank you for reading this far. By now we've probably whetted your appetite with new structural elements, piqued your interest with the new APIs, and you're champing at the bit to start using all these new cool things. But Internet Explorer 6, 7, and 8 stand in your way. Not for long, gentle reader.

## Introducing polyfills

When you decorate your house, you find cracks or holes in walls and wooden surfaces that need to be filled so that the surface is level. To achieve this, you use a white filler paste that gives you a smooth, level surface upon which you can paint, hang wallpaper, or otherwise decorate.

This chapter introduces *polyfilling*, which is a way to fill the holes in browser support using JavaScript (or any appropriate technology such as Flash if it makes sense) to level the playing field.

> Shivs vs Shims: Did Bruce & Remy mean "shiv"? Yes folks. The HTML5 shiv was coined by John Resig who later admitted (or realised) that he really meant shim, but the name stuck, so now it's the HTML5 shiv. It's a bit stabby, but it works.

We've seen that the HTML5 shiv allows new HTML5 elements to be styled in oldie. But what about all the exciting APIs we've introduced?

The method is:

* Code your page according to the standard APIs and test in browsers that support all the features you need to use.
* Using JavaScript, feature-detect each of the features that your site requires to work.
* If a feature is unavailable in the browser, lazy-load a polyfill script that fakes support.
* Pat yourself on the back and have a cup of tea and a custard cream.

There is a downside: really creaky browsers might end up loading a lot of scripts, so performance could be terrible. This is a matter of testing thoroughly.

You might also be somewhat surprised at this hacky approach. After all, isn't the point of HTML5 to let us make modern web apps without hacks and fallbacks? Well, yes, it is. The crucial difference with the polyfilling method is that new browsers use only the modern standards, without any hacks. The hacks are only there to patch up old browsers; this approach has been termed "regressive enhancement," because we're hacking for a dwindling number of old browsers, rather than hacking forever after.

> Just remember that a polyfill isn't progressive enhancement--nor does it particularly support graceful degradation. A polyfill typically requires JavaScript in the first place.

The polyfilling method also means clean code; we code to the spec in our markup and scripts in the first instance, and only (optionally) load additional hacks using our of-the-shelf polyfilling scripts. It's what marketing types call a "win-win situation," because they're not always wrong about everything.

What makes a polyfill different from the techniques we have already, like a shim, is this: if you removed the polyfill script, your code would continue to work, without any changes required in *spite of the polyfill* being removed.

## Feature detection

Detecting support for a particular technology is the first step in deciding whether or not your application needs a polyfill. Note that I say detecting support, rather than just browser sniffing, declaring that this particular browser is lacking a particular feature and therefore we'll fix it using our hack.

With feature detection you've future proofed your polyfill. That way if the user upgrades their browser to one that supports the required technology, your polyfill sees the native feature is there and doesn't run. Equally, the user could still be using the same old browser, like IE7, but could have installed some super power extension that gives them all the tasty HTML5 goodness. Any user agent sniffing would have failed in this instance, whereas feature detection leaves you feeling smugger than Bruce when he's wearing his "I'm smug" t-shirt.

With detecting support in mind, not everything can be detected, which we'll come on to.

There are different ways to detect support in browsers, and often it comes down to the specific technology you're trying to support, but the key thing to remember is that if you're writing a polyfill, make absolutely sure your feature detection works correctly in all the browsers you plan to support.

In the majority of cases, though, feature detection is just a matter of testing whether a function or property exists in the current browser.

## Detecting properties

For example, along with the document.body shortcut property, in HTML5 we now have document.head. Not so exciting, but still useful when you want to inject some script element, for instance. As this is simply a property, it's easy to test for its existence and to set it if it's not available:

```js
if (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] !== document.head) {
  document.head = document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0];
}
```

When simplified, it looks like this:

```js
document.head || (document.head = document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0]);
```

> A falsy value in JavaScript is one that returns false in a test though doesn't particularly have to be the value false. For example, testing (in an if statement) the value of an empty string, the number 0 or the expression 1 1 all have falsy values.

In our code, we're testing for document.head, and if it has a falsey value (in fact, undefined), we explicitly set document.head to the head element. However, rarely in the wastelands of cross browser support is anything that simple. The potential problem with this code is that if you were to generate an iframe dynamically in JavaScript, its document wouldn't have the head property unless you ran this code against it. Not a big problem--we just rerun the code--but it's worth bearing in mind (hat tip to Mathias Bynens for the code, and Lea Verou for flagging iframes).

Another common detection method is to test for the existence of a particular property in an HTML element. For example, to test if the browser has native support for the details element, we create the element and then test if the open property (which we know is part of the standard details implementation) exists, so we create this element on the fly, and test if said property is present:

```js
if (!'open' in document.createElement('details')) {
  // does not have native support, let's polyfill it...
}
```

What we're asking here is: does the open property exist on the details element. It doesn't have to be in the DOM to give us an accurate reading of true or false.

### Detecting new functions

If you don't know already, in JavaScript, everything is an object (and there are lots of great books dedicated to this particular aspect of JavaScript). Since we're in the browser, the global root variable is the window object, and functions and methods are properties on this window object. Because of this, we can test for new functions, methods, and constructors in the same way as we did when we were looking for property values.

When I want to test if `sessionStorage` is available natively in the browser, I can do:

```js
typeof window.sessionStorage !== 'undefined'
```

However, older versions of Firefox (3.x in particular) will throw a security exception if cookies are disabled for this particular line of code (as we touch on in Chapter 6). As I want this polyfill to support old versions of Firefox, rather than throwing exceptions all over the place, I'll wrap the test in a try/catch:

```js
var sessionStorageAvailable = (function() {
  try {
    return typeof window.sessionStorage !== 'undefined';
  } catch (e) {
    return false;
  }
})();
```

As we've already seen, each property and method you're aiming to polyfill will have its own intricacies when testing in the browsers you plan to support. But this is part of web development which we're all well and truly used to.

### Detecting everything when JavaScript isn't your forte

If JavaScript isn't your bag, there's still hope for you yet. The [Modernizr](http://modernizr.com) project, maintained by Paul Irish, Alex Sexton and Ateş, is a small JavaScript library that gives you a complete programmatic view of what your browser does and doesn't support.

Don't be confused by the name though; the library won't modernise your browser, but it will give you the starting point to easily detect support for over 40 different new aspects of HTML5 and CSS3. If you wanted to improve your JavaScript, or even just for the curious, it's worth popping the hood on Modernizr as it's a great way to learn how some features can be detected. You might find that some places are ugly to look at as browsers sometimes lie about their support or don't completely follow the specifications.

### Performance of feature testing and polyfills

A question that's usually asked when JavaScript is proposed to solve a deficiency in the browser is: "What's the performance?"

Of course, any additional JavaScript that runs in the browser (even if it's just a one-liner that tests for the presence of a particular feature) will have a performance impact. However, when it comes to real-world use, a very large proportion of feature detection tests are going to be micro-snippets of code that won't have any effect on your application at all. Runtime will be in the milliseconds, which we'd say is negligible in most situations.

What you should also remember is that JavaScript engines are really fast. As the newer and faster browsers are less likely to need polyfills, extensive patches, or helper scripts--and instead require only that you run a few tests--there will be little or no cost for users with modern browsers.

Even for older browsers, which have slower JavaScript engines, there will still be no significant cost in the feature detection, but there may be some wait time to load the polyfill. This may be unavoidable, as we're trying to drag these old browsers into today's world, albeit kicking and screaming.

What's particularly important is that you don't polyfill everything including the kitchen sink (sorry, I couldn't resist the poor man's DIY joke). When you're including JavaScript to do what the browser can't do natively, it will always cost a little bit of performance. If you include a lot of redundant functionality that you won't make use of, then it's obviously a waste. Try to include only what you absolutely need. If you're building the next Super Bruce & Super Remy adventure game using canvas, and find that polyfilling slows IE6 down to a grinding halt and your main audience is IE6 users: don't use it! As the developer you need to make the judgement call as to whether the selected technology is the right tool for the job.

## The undetectables

As we've already alluded to, there are definitely nuances in writing a polyfill for one technology to the next. However, there are also the black holes, those undetectable technologies.

A simple example of an "undetectable" is a technology that gives a false positive when tested.

Let's take, for example, the `contenteditable` attribute from Chapter 2. If you test for the attribute using the methods we've seen so far, it will tell you that `contenteditable` is supported, but really the problem is that on a device like Safari Mobile (pre-iOS 5) the keyboard doesn't actually focus to the editable area, so in reality it's not supported, regardless of the feature detection test.

It's hard to say exactly what is and isn't available to feature test. So long as you're testing your polyfill against all the browsers your site plans to support, you'll find whether or not the feature can be truly and reliably detected.

If you'd like a head start on those undetectables and determining the environments in which they're undetectable, the Modernizr project has a [page dedicated to those technologies](https://github.com/Modernizr/Modernizr/wiki/Undetectables).

If a feature can't be detected, what's the solution? Well, it's nasty, but one answer could be to browser sniff. It's an unreliable technique because the browser doesn't always tell the truth about its version or even its name--even today Microsoft Internet Explorer claims to be a Mozilla browser! What you should also be wary of with user agent sniffing is that there are future browser versions that your code might pick up incorrectly. It's a very wobbly ground on which to rely.

## Where to find polyfills

As with most JavaScript snippet libraries, polyfills are scattered around the Web, but Paul Irish, like a superhero flying out of the deepest, darkest corners of the Web, started a [wiki page collecting](https://github.com/Modernizr/Modernizr/wiki/HTML5-Cross-Browser-Polyfills) all the ones he could find. Since this page is a wiki, it has grown over time with many contributions from the web development community, including our fine selves, with polyfills that provide all sorts of solutions ranging from canvas, SVG, Web Forms, `WebSockets`, `EventSource`, details element, data-* attributes, and many, many more.

In addition, this resource doesn't just include polyfills, but shims and other useful libraries as well.

{{aside

# CSS Polyfills

The concept of polyfilling applies to CSS3, also: [CSS3Pie](http://css3pie.com) and [IE-CSS3](http://fetchak.com/ie-css3/) make IE6–8 capable of rendering a few of the most useful CSS3 decoration features. Meanwhile, [selectivizr](http://selectivizr.com) is a JavaScript utility that emulates CSS3 pseudo-classes and attribute selectors in IE6–8. [eCSStender](http://ecsstender.org) is another polyfill. Of course, CSS is never required for a site to function in the same way an API is--if it is, you're doing it very wrong. And please note: CSS3 has nothing to do with HTML5. Think of this as bonus information, because we love you.

}}

## A working example with Modernizr

So now you're armed to the teeth with feature detection techniques, and you've written your amazing polyfill script that will smooth out the cracks in browsers when people visit your site, but how do you make it all work?

We'll show you how to use Modernizr combined with a super duper useful tool called yepnope (by Alex Sexton and Ralph Holzmann at [http://yepnopejs.com](http://yepnopejs.com)) to firstly detect whether the browser supports the technology you need, and, if it doesn't, load a polyfill and then get on with loading the rest of your application.

Since the nice folks behind Modernizr care so much about you, yepnope already comes bundled inside Modernizr with the Modernizr.load method, so you don't even have to worry about it.

Let's say your application is going to use `sessionStorage`. You've found the `sessionStorage` polyfill Remy wrote, but it also requires JSON support, so we'll need to test for both `sessionStorage` and JSON support before our application can start properly.

```js
Modernizr.load({
  // first tests
  test: function () {
    return !!window.JSON;
  },
  nope: 'json2.js'
}, {
  // second tests
  test: Modernizr.sessionStorage,
  nope: 'sessionStorage.js'
},
'app.js' // now once we're all good to go, include app.js
});
```

Make sure you're using a version of Modernizr that you built yourself. This is easy if you just go to the Modernizr website: select the pink Production button and build yourself. From here you can select the features you want to test for. The advantage is that your visitor downloads less code when visiting your website.

You include the Modernizr JavaScript file, and then the code above, which simply tells Modernizr to run two tests before including the app.js file (which would include all your application code). Although we're calling Modernizr, all the testing and conditional loading is happening in the magic yepnope library. You don't have to worry about that; just focus on specifying the feature tests required before your code gets run.

The first test is checking that JSON is available natively. This isn't part of HTML5, but hey, we included geolocation in this book, and that's not part of HTML5 either! The point is that you polyfill any technology if you want to level the playing field. If the test fails--say the browser is IE7, which doesn't have JSON natively available--our code will go ahead and load the json2.js file.

Next, we test for `sessionStorage` support. Since we chose to build this version of Modernizr to test for `sessionStorage`, this value will be available as either true or false depending on support. If false, the `sessionStorage.js` polyfill is loaded (note that from our example above, it will read the `sessionStorage.js` file from the relative path on your domain).

Finally, once all tests are complete and all required polyfills are loaded, the app.js file is loaded and your application can start up properly, safe in the knowledge that even if it's running in

a dirty old browser like IE6, it can still use the latest, snazziest technology like `sessionStorage` and JSON.

## Summary

We've seen that it's possible, and relatively simple, to make HTML5 apps work in old browsers by performing feature detection (as by design, most--but sadly not all--HTML5 features can be programmatically detected) and patching in support with helper script. However, it's important to be aware that polyfills probably won't perform as well as their native counterparts,

and that older browsers like IE6 will be further slowed down by their non-performing JavaScript engines. It may well be better in these cases to avoid polyfilling and provide a completely different fallback solution.

