# And Finally...&nbsp;

Hopefully, you've been enlightened by our brief foray into the new structures and APIs that you can use.

There are loads more cool but not-yet-implemented things in

the spec that we haven't shown you. For example, you'll be able to register the browser as a content handler (`registerContentHandler`) so that clicking a document, photo, or video on your desktop opens the browser and goes to a web application that can edit that document, complete with application toolbars (using `<menu>` and `<command>`), all built with HTML5. Awaiting implentation.

Forget the marketing BS of "Web 2.0." We're at the beginning of Web Development 2.0: powerful languages like HTML5, SVG, and CSS3 will revolutionise the way we build the Web. Browsers support more and more aspects of these languages, and you can be certain that further support is being added daily.

But it's vital that we remember that we are dealing with web development. The Web is based on URLs and hyperlinks, and°it's a method to deliver content. If your amazing demo is°basically contentless divs being flown around the screen by°JavaScript; or if your content is text-as-pixels scripted with canvas; if you require a mouse or a touchscreen; or if you have no links, no content, and no URLs to bookmark or link to; or if you generate all your markup from unreadable obfuscated JavaScript, ask yourself: am I developing for the Web, or am I reinventing DHTML or Flash intros that just happen to run in the browser instead of a plugin?

Of course, have a play with the new features. Experiment with the new markup structures, manipulate video on the fly, and build fun and attractive games and apps that use canvas. By reading this book, you're demonstrating that you're an early adopter, you're ahead-of-the-curve, so please set a good example for your colleagues: respect those visitors who have older browsers or assistive technologies.

Thanks for buying this book and sticking with us. Pop by introducinghtml5.com; all the code (and more) is available.

Bon voyage: Enjoy building incredible things. kthxbai.

***--Bruce Lawson and Remy Sharp Birmingham, and Brighton, September 2011***