# Offline

How many times have I been working on a train, desperately trying to get a 3G connection with my cheap dongle, and failed to navigate a web application because we went into a tunnel (and thus lost all connectivity)? A lot, that's how many. Computing with no Internet or with a choppy connection has always been common with mobile computing, but now you are more likely to be trying to work in a hosted application. Sometimes, you may sim-

ply chose to go offline, what then? As we become more mobile with our computers, being able to use a website outside of reception becomes more and more important.

We're used to creating web apps that rely absolutely

on the Web. Our websites run in browsers, which are designed to be a viewport onto the Web. The offline web applications part of the HTML5 spec takes the "web" out of "web app." The browser will manage a local cache so our application will work without an Internet connection.

## Pulling the plug: going offline

> In the context of the offline spec, the manifest is a list of files that defines what files should be included for your offline application.

To work offline, an application need only a manifest telling the browser what it needs to store in its local cache. The manifest can be as simple as a list of files and you'll be done. Once

the browser has stored the cache of assets, CSS, JavaScript, images, and so on, when the page is reloaded the browser uses these local assets to drive the website.

Along with telling the browser what to cache, you can also tell it what not to cache, ensuring that requests to that particular URL always go via the Web. Finally, HTML5 gives you a way to manage fallback cases. In the situation where you're currently without a connection and you try to access a resource that isn't in your local (offline) cache, the fallback can be used to serve

a different resource (which is also cached by the browser). For example, going to the chat part of your application could fall back to a page saying this feature is available only whilst online.

The first part of an offline application is down to the manifest, which tells the browser what to cache (or what not to). The second part is in the `applicationCache`. This object contains methods to trigger updates and to swap the latest cache into the browser. It also has events firing off it that the author can use to notify the user that the application might be upgradable.

{{aside

# What about offline and online events?

Indeed, what about offline events? The HTML5 spec has defined offline events and, in fact, offline events have been in some browsers for quite a number of years now. The spec defines two events that should fire on the document: online and offline. There's still varying support in browsers today, but that's not the problem. Currently these events only work as you'd expect in mobile devices (and given that there are so many mobile devices, it's fair to say I haven't tested every mobile device). However on the desktop, the situation is very different.

These events only fire when the user--yes, that's right, the user--explicitly sets the browser to Work Offline. They don't automatically fire when, for whatever reason, the web connection drops or is reestablished.

To further compound the problem, some browsers (for instance, Chrome and Safari) lack a Work Offline menu item, so these events will never be triggered. Frankly, this is stupid in my book, which is why I wouldn't particularly rely on these events in a production application. One possible alternative is to constantly poll your service to ensure it's up, and I'll show you how you can do this using the manifest in the section below entitled "Using the manifest to detect connectivity."

}}

## The cache manifest

The manifest is the thing that tells the browser when and what to get from its offline cache, from the Web, or to fall back onto

if assets are missing. Once the manifest is loaded or updated,

it triggers an update on the `applicationCache` object. To tell the browser to look for a manifest is simple: You add the manifest attribute to the <html> element, and point it to the file containing your application's manifest:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" manifest="/time.appcache">
  <!-- my spiffing time app lives here -->
</html>
```

My example application, in all its glory, will show you the time on your machine and the time on my server. Not quite as complex as a Google Docs application, but enough to demonstrate that, when the connection isn't available, instead of showing the server time--which it can't get--it will show you the working app, but with the server time marked as unavailable. Figure 7.1 shows the application on first load and when online.

{{figure 7.1

Figure 7.1 Move over, Google Apps: Our application tells us the time!

}}

My complete application requires

- The application page: index.html in this case
- time.js: the code to tick the clock forward
- time.css: simple styles for my app
- server-time.js: in this example, let's say this is generated every minute by my server

> With the custom .appcache file extension, you will need to use particular methods to ensure this is served to the browser correctly, as you'll see later in this chapter under "How to serve the manifest."

Everything, with the exception of the server-time.js file, will be stored in the manifest. Finally, in addition, I need a file that will be served up in place of server-time.js if we're offline. This will be:

- fallback-server-time.js: contains a notice about being offline

Here's what the contents of my time.appcache look like:

```text
CACHE MANIFEST
index.html
time.js
time.css

FALLBACK:
server-time.js
fallback-server-time.js

NETWORK: *

# version 8
```

The format of the file is important. You'll see the first line is `CACHE MANIFEST`. This tells the browser that what follows is the source to a manifest file. Within the manifest, files are listed under categories, also known as namespaces. The default category is CACHE, and if it isn't stated, all the filenames encountered are put in that category until the browser hits a new category. So with that in mind, I could have written my file to look like the following--and it would have the exact same effect:

> The web page that includes the manifest (in the `<html>` tag) is also implicitly included in the cache manifest. For this reason, I recommend explicitly including the file, `index.html` in my case, in the manifest so you don't get confused further along in the development of your project.

```text
CACHE MANIFEST

CACHE:
index.html
time.js
time.css

FALLBACK:
server-time.js
fallback-server-time.js

NETWORK: *

# version 9
```

Y ou can repeat a category, too. To append new files to be included in the cache, include them at the end of the file so the manifest reads: cache, fallback, cache. This is perfectly valid, too.

FALLBACK tells the browser that if anything matches the URL on the left, in my case server-time.js, and it's not in the manifest and it can't be accessed with the existing connection, then serve up the file specified on the right side, in my case fallback-server-time.js. The fallback file fallback-server-time.js is included in the files that are cached by the browser, just as files are in the CACHE category. We'll look at the fallback category in more detail in the next section.

FALLBACK also allows you to use URL paths, so you could use the following:

```text
FALLBACK:
server-time.js
fallback-server-time.js
/ offline.html
```

> Cachebusting means to forcefully prevent the resource from being cached. In the example of the manifest, this is achieved by changing its contents.

This tells the browser that if server-time.js is requested and it's unavailable, then serve up fallback-server-time.js. If any other path is requested, such as /foo.html, and it's unavailable (either because you're offline or it's not in the cache), the browser will serve offline.html. This method can be used to easily define an entire portion of your site to only be available online and redirect the user to offline.html if they try to access a resource while they're not connected. Note that giving this rule that is catching all failed requests, it also means that currently, if an image URL results in a 404, it will be served offline.html--so you would need to add multiple sensible rules to your fallback category.

Figure 7.2 shows my time application when the app doesn't have connectivity to the site, and the request for server-time.js falls back to fallback-server-time.js showing an entirely different message.

{{figure 7.2

Figure 7.2 My time application continues to work whilst offline, pulling a different resource for the server-time JavaScript file.

}}

> Browsers like the manifest and don't let go of their cache easily. Make sure you include a comment that has a version number, revision, or timestamp that you can change and force an update to the browser's manifest for your domain.

Finally, I've included a comment in the file, starting with the `#` symbol (note that comments must be on their own line, too). This tells me the version number. This is important to cachebust the manifest. It's not that a comment is required, but something in the manifest file must change. Personally I like to use a comment or revision number of MD5 hash of all the files in the application. This change in the manifest file tells the browser to reload the contents of the offline manifest. Also, you can't just change the timestamp on the manifest or any of the assets to force a reload, but changing anything inside the manifest will force a reload.

In addition to the CACHE and FALLBACK categories, there's the NETWORK category, which already has entries associated with it in our example. This is the whitelist category, and what's important about these entries is that they tell the browser that any requests to any asset that isn't in our offline cache should go via the Web.

If you're like me, you're probably thinking, "Surely that's the default?" I'm afraid not. If the browser is viewing a page that's running from the `AppCache`, that is, the page was served up from the manifest, then all resources on that page must match some rule in the manifest; otherwise, they fail to load. This seems odd, but the rule we've already added ensures that we'll never get burnt by this odd behaviour.

We could include more specific URLs, but by putting the * rule in it ensures that everything else goes via the Web, and we don't end up with any ugly old broken images.

## Network and fallback in detail

### Providing fallback content

Both with the FALLBACK and the NETWORK namespaces, there's no pattern matching support--though you might think this if you were looking at an example manifest file with a * character in it; in fact this is a special character that we'll look at in the network whitelist section below.

FALLBACK works by specifying a resource location, or a resource prefix, that is, what the URL starts with. Note that there are no regexes going on here; it's just "does it start with...."

When your website is offline, and you're using the `AppCache`, you could direct all the requests to the payment.html page to an offline version of the page using the following:

```text
FALLBACK
payment.html
payment-offline.html
```

However, if your site requests /money/payment.html this rule will not match, but we can match on the start of the URL like this:

```text
FALLBACK
/money/
payment-offline.html
```

Now any request that starts with /money/ for a URL whilst we're offline and whilst the URL is unavailable in the cache will have the payment-offline.html served up instead.

### Using the network whitelist

The NETWORK namespace works in a similar way to the FALLBACK namespace, in that you can specify a full URL to whitelist, or you can specify a prefix to match against.

There is also a special rule that if the NETWORK rule contains only a * symbol, then any and all URLs that are requested, that aren't in the application cache, will go via the network. You'd think this would be normal behaviour, but without this flag the browser is actually unable to make the web request. This is both true when online and offline. Seems a little batty, right?

It's as if once the manifest file is in place, the browser is running all of it's request routing though that file, and if there's not a rule matching the request, the request will fail. This goes for both local assets to the domain and remote assets. This is the area that has possibly caught me out the most times--so it's worth remembering!

This * character is an open whitelist and it's important because it allows any asset that you've not accounted for in your manifest to be requested. So if you don't have this rule and use something like Google Analytics, the requests made to Google's servers that track the usage on your site will fail, because the manifest is in use, and there's no cached copy of this request, nor fallback or network rule to allow the request to be made.

In general, I'd recommend having a final rule that sets the whitelist as open. This should help during development and avoid too many debugging headaches:

```text
NETWORK:
/remote/
*
```

If you've also supported Firefox 3.6, you'll need to include the following two lines which act the same way as the * rule (and I know this looks like the wildcard rule I said didn't exist, it just seems that Firefox made a little mistake along the way--the new versions of Firefox are all fixed and ignoring these two lines now):

```text
http://*
https://*
```

These NETWORK rules tell the browser that all requests to anything starting with /remote/ will go via the network, and any other requests will go via the network (i.e. the web)--and now my Google Analytics will be correctly tracked if my visitor is online.

## How to serve the manifest

> Changing the mime types on your web server is beyond the scope of this book, but your hosting company can point you in the right direction.

There's one last hurdle to jump before you can take your application completely offline: You need to serve the manifest file properly, meaning it must have the extension .appcache and it must have the right mime type.

If you're using a common web server like Apache, you need to add the following to your mime.types file:

```text
text/cache-manifest appcache
```

There's multiple ways to serve up the right content type depending on your server of choice; just ensure the web server is sending the text/cache-manifest file header when you request any file with the .appcache extension. You can test this by checking the headers of the file requested using a tool like curl:

```bash
curl -I http://mysite.com/time.appcache
```

That should return (something like) this:

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Mon, 13 Sep 2010 12:59:30 GMT
Server: Apache/2.2.13 (Unix) mod_ssl/2.2.13 OpenSSL/0.9.8l DAV/2 PHP/5.3.0
Last-Modified: Tue, 31 Aug 2010 03:11:00 GMT
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Content-Length: 113
**Content-Type: text/cache-manifest**
```

Now that your server is sending the right headers, and your manifest file is ready to be used, pat yourself on the back. Let's take a look at it in action.

## The browser-server process

When working with the offline applications, it's useful to understand the communication process between the browser and the server. If at all possible, I recommend running the following command on your servers to tail your access logs whilst refreshing your page using the cache manifest to see exactly what's being pulled. It will show you whether the files from your manifest are actually being requested and served up by your server:

```bash
tail -f logs/access_log
```

{{aside

# Watch out for dodgy foxes!

Firefox boasts support for offline applications, but it doesn't quite work as smoothly as other browsers, and there are a few important bugs to be aware of. If you're testing with Firefox, make sure you're also checking what's actually being requested from your server by monitoring the server logs. The browser should always request the manifest on every single visit (or refresh) of your domain. Older versions of Firefox (3.6 and 4) don't re-request the manifest, meaning that you're stuck with the manifest and resources that the browser downloaded the first time, regardless of any changes you may have made! There is hope! You can tell the browser never to cache the manifest file by adding the following code to your server config or .htaccess (or similar) file:

```text
<filesMatch ".appcache$">
  Header set Cache-Control "max-age=0, private, no-store, no-cache, must-revalidate"
</filesMatch>
```

If you're using mod_expires for Apache, you need to include the following in your httpd.conf:

```text
<IfModule mod_expires.c>
  ExpiresActive on
  ExpiresByType text/cache-manifest "access plus 0 seconds"
</IfModule>
```

You also send custom headers on requests for .appcache files and send a no-cache header:

```text
Header set Pragma "no-cache"
```

I will caveat this whole sidebar with the simple fact that Firefox upgrades are moving faster than, well, a fox that's on fire. It's quite possible that by the time you read this, we'll have Firefox 13 and it won't be an issue. It's also quite possible that when this book is released, Firefox's latest release won't have this issue--but this no-cache rule won't do any harm--so go ahead and plug it in.

}}

When you visit a web page that makes use of the cache manifest, such as my time example, here is what happens:

1. Browser: requests[[ http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/)]([ http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/))

2. Server: returns index.html

3. Browser: parses index.html and requests all the assets in the page, images, CSS, JS, and the manifest file

4. Server: returns all requested assets

5. Browser: processes the manifest and requests all the items in the manifest, regardless of whether it's just requested them. This could effectively be a double request for your application if you're caching all the assets

6. Server: returns the requested manifest assets

7. Browser: application cache has updated, and triggers an event stating so.

Now the browser has fully loaded the cache using the files listed in the manifest. If the manifest hasn't changed and the browser is reloaded, here's what happens:

1. Browser: re-requests[[ http://introducinghtml5.com/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/)]([ http://introducinghtml5.com/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/)) examples/ch07/time/

2. Browser: detects that it has local cache for this page and serves it locally

3. Browser: parses index.html, and all assets in the local cache are served locally

4. Browser: requests the manifest file from the server

5. Server: returns a 304 code notifying the browser that the manifest hasn't changed.

Once the browser has its cache of assets, it serves them locally first and then requests the manifest. As shown in Figure 7.3, Safari is loading all the assets for my time application, but at the same time I'm monitoring the access log for the app, in which we can see only time.appcache and server-time.js is being requested over the connection.

{{figure 7.3

Figure 7.3 Safari makes a request for the app loading using the local cache and requesting only the manifest and server-time from the server. This time, you re-request the app--but the manifest has changed. If the manifest has changed, the process from Step 1 through 4 is exactly the same, but next the browser needs to reload the cache.

}}

1. Browser: re-requests[[ http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/)]([ http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/]( http://introducinghtml5.com/examples/ch07/time/))

2. Browser: detects that it has local cache for this page and serves it locally

3. Browser: parses index.html, and all assets in the local cache are served locally

4. Browser: requests the manifest file from the server

5. Server: returns the updated manifest file

6. Browser: processes the manifest and requests all the items in the manifest

7. Server: returns the requested manifest assets

8. Browser: application cache has been updated, and triggers an event stating so.

However, it's important to know that even though the assets may have changed, any previously loaded assets will not have changed (for example, images don't suddenly change, and old JavaScript functions haven't changed). In fact, at this point in the application's life, none of the new cache is available. Only when the page is reloaded will the new cached assets become available.

We'll look at how we can get our hands on these new assets by looking at the `applicationCache` object.

## applicationCache

The `applicationCache` is the object that notifies you of changes to the local cache, but also allows you to manually trigger an update to the cache. Only if the manifest has changed will the `applicationCache` receive an event saying it has updated.

In the process list from the previous section, once the browser has finished loading the cache with the files from the manifest, the update event fires on the `applicationCache`. You could use this event to tell users that the application they're using has been upgraded and they should reload the browser window to get the latest and greatest version of your app. You can do this using a simple event listener and a notification:

```js
applicationCache.onUpdateReady = function () {
  // the cache manifest has changed, let's tell the user to
  // reload to get whiz bang version 2.0
  if (confirm("Do you want to update to the latest version of this app?")) {
    // force a refresh if the user agrees
    window.location.reload();
  }
};
```

However, what if you wanted to tell the user what had changed? Or even perhaps try to dynamically reload some portion of the functionality. Strictly speaking, it's possible, but it might be tricky depending on your application. Nonetheless, to load the newly downloaded cache into memory, you can use the `applicationCache.swapCache()` method:

```js
applicationCache.onUpdateReady = function () {
  applicationCache.swapCache();
  // the cache manifest has changed, let's tell the user to
  // reload to get whiz bang version 2.0
  notifyUserOfUpgrade();
};
```

Although swapping the cache removes the old cache and loads in the new cache, it doesn't actually swap images or reload any code. This happens only if the asset is manually reloaded or the entire window is reloaded. However, you could force a manual reload on one of these assets by dynamically creating a new DOM node for a script or image you wanted to reload.

For example, let's say that you have a file in your manifest that has the latest version description in version.js. If the browser has an upgrade ready (that you detected through the update ready event), inside the `notifyUserOfUpgrade` function you'll load the version.js file. Loading this file re-executes the JavaScript that's inside the version.js file and you'll be able to show the user the latest list of changes if he reloads the application.

I think that, generally speaking, the `swapCache` has very limited practical use. But the update ready event is very useful to tell users that they might want to reload the browser to get the updated application code, a bit like a normal desktop application telling us there's a new upgrade ready to be downloaded. Except in this case, the upgrade has already been downloaded behind the scenes for us.

## Debugging tips

No doubt you're already thinking, "This sounds complicated." It is and it isn't. Once you're a dab hand at offline apps, it's easy. But how do you debug when you have your first run-in with it not working?

Browser debug tools vary widely, and as much as we'd love all their tools to work the same, sometimes it's just easier to add the debug information to our development process.

Currently the best tool I've come across is Google Chrome's web inspector, specifically because it reports the progress of the application caching, but also tells me whether it's using a local version or not.

{{figure 7.4
Figure 7.4 is jsconsole.com, which uses the appcache to work offline. This is the output in Chrome's web console when we visit for the first time:
}}

{{figure 7.4

Figure 7.4 jsconsole being loaded for the first time in Google Chrome,[[ http://jsconsole.com]( http://jsconsole.com)]([ http://jsconsole.com]( http://jsconsole.com)).

}}

Notice how in Figure 7.5 each asset is being logged and cached. These can also be seen individually in the resources panel:

{{figure 7.5

Figure 7.5 Google Chrome's resource list for the current application manifest.

}}

When I refresh jsconsole.com after the manifest is loaded, only the manifest file is requested and the application doesn't need updating, as shown in the log in Figure 7.6.

{{figure 7.6

Figure 7.6 Google Chrome's resource list for the current application manifest after refreshing.

}}

I'm sure the other browsers' tools will eventually give you more information (if they haven't already by the time this book is printed), but you could also bind to the individual `applicationCache` events, like `updateReady`, and so on, to get some idea of what your site is doing during start-up.

### Using the manifest to detect connectivity

Part of HTML5 includes a property on the navigator object that is supposed to tell you if the browser is online or offline, via

```js
navigator.onLine
```

However, as we've already seen when discussing online and offline events, this property changes only when a user explicitly sets the browser to work offline (with the exception of some mobile device browsers). As a developer, what you'd really want is to detect whether or not the browser can connect to your application server. A far more reliable way to do this is by using the cache manifest's FALLBACK category. By including a FALLBACK rule in our manifest, you can pull in a piece of JavaScript and detect whether you're online or offline.

Your manifest:

```text
CACHE MANIFEST
FALLBACK:
online.js offline.js
```

online.js contains:

```js
setOnline(true);
```

offline.js contains:

```js
setOnline(false);
```

In your application you have a function called `testOnline` that dynamically creates a script element that tries to load the online.js JavaScript file. If it succeeds, the `setOnline(true)` code is run. If you are offline, behind the scenes the browser falls back on the offline.js JavaScript file, which calls `setOnline(false)`. From there, you might want to trigger the `applicationCache.update()`:

```js
function testOnline(fn) {
  var script = document.createElement('script');
  script.src = 'online.js';
  // alias the setOnline function to the new function
  // that was passed in.
  window.setOnline = function (online) {
    document.body.removeChild(script);
    fn(online);
  };
  // attaching script node trigger the code to run
  document.body.appendChild(script);
}

testOnline(function (online) {
  if (online) {
    applicationCache.update();
  } else {
    // show users an unobtrusive message that they're disconnected
  }
});
```

## Killing the cache

As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, the browsers get pretty sticky with the cache. It's easy to get stuck in a cycle where you can't clear the cache to test a change you've made. So far, the spec has no method to programmatically clear the cache (for example, you can't do it from the `applicationCache` object).

With that in mind, during development I strongly urge you to avoid using the cache manifest. Make sure your application development is completely finished, and only then move on to adding the manifest attribute. That said, once you've got the cache in place, how do you go about clearing it? Manually.

Upgrading to a new cache should be as simple as changing the contents of the manifest file. As I said before, you can use a comment that includes a version number or similar.

> When you clear the cache, make sure there aren't any windows still open with your application that uses the manifest.

What if you want to start again, or what if you want to remove the manifest attribute all together? You'll only be able to do this during development because it requires you to clear the browser's cache (and depending on the browser, it's tucked away in different places). This isn't something you can do programmatically: only the user of the browser can actively clear their offline cache.

For Safari, you need to empty (or clear) the cache. By cache I mean anything that's been stored to help your browsing experience go faster.

Safari clears the cache for everything except the particular window that you have visible, so when you refresh, it's still got the cache manifest included. This goes for the iPhone in particular.

For Chrome, you can navigate to [chrome://appcache-internals/](chrome://appcache-internals/) where you can specifically remove a cache for a URL.

For Firefox, you need to open Preferences, go to the Advanced tab, and select the Network tab. From there you can clear individual domains' cache.

For Opera, open Preferences, navigate to Advanced, and select Storage. From there you can individually remove a URL's storage. Although they call this section persistent storage (suggesting that it refers to `localStorage` and `sessionStorage`) there appear to be extra URL entries with data stored, often in the form of the domain with a hash at the end, for instance html5demos.com/$7b8e3c7f. It's unclear exactly what this is (clearing this last one empties neither the `AppCache` nor the `localStorage`) but to be on the safe side I'd recommend removing both.

## Summary

In the past, websites often failed to work when users weren't connected to the Internet. Browsers are now beginning to support offline use, coupled with the ability to detect whether or not a browser is currently online or offline (with a few workarounds). You now know how to make your web apps work, even without direct web access.