# Geolocation

In the UK, when red telephone boxes were still a common sight, inside each box was a printed note indicating the address you were calling from. This was so that if you had to call the police or an ambulance you knew where you were. Of course, this also helped after a hazy Friday night, calling home for a lift because you didn't know where you were. This is the essence of Geolocation-- except without the beer.

The geolocation API has absolutely nothing to do with the HTML5 specification, and was created by the W3C rather than the WHATWG. In fact, it was never even part of the original Web Applications specification (though it does now reference the HMTL5 specification), but it's so darn cool that we had to include it in this book. In actuality, it's a key API when it comes to applications and adding some wicked--yes, wicked--social interaction.

The API is incredibly simple to work with, and you can easily enhance your web apps if they make use of any geo data by plugging this API into the app and saving users from having to finger or scroll all over your map to find themselves.

Currently, Internet Explorer 9 and at least the latest and previous versions of all other browsers have support for the geolocation API--not a bad state to be in for a bleeding edge technology. In addition, many smart phones and their mobile browsers support the geolocation API, including iOS, Andriod's WebKit, Firefox Mobile, and Opera Mobile. In addition, if you're using Open Web technologies to build native mobile applications, PhoneGap, the framework for deploying Open Web mobile apps, provides the geolocation API as well.

## Sticking a pin in your user

The geolocation API gives us a way to locate the user's exact position. There are already lots of applications that make use of this API, ranging from mapping, as seen on Google Maps in Figure 9.1, to location-based social networks such as Gowalla and Google Buzz.

{{figure 9.1
Figure 9.1 Google Maps detects geolocation support and adds the "locate me" functionality.
}}

The geolocation API offers two methods for getting the geo information from your user:

1. `getCurrentPosition` is a one-shot method for grabbing the user's current location.

2. `watchPosition` keeps an eye on the user's position and keeps polling at regular intervals to see if that location has changed. `watchPosition` mirrors `getCurrentPosition`'s functionality, but if the user's position changes, it will also tell your code. Note that even though `watchPosition` is polling your position, it will only call your callback if the position has changed. To stop watching, or polling, you pass the return value from `watchPosition` to `clearWatch` which we'll see later on.

Both `getCurrentPosition` and `watchPosition` work asynchronously to ascertain the user's location. However, if this is the first time your site has asked the user for their location, the browser will show some kind of dialog (as we'll see in a moment) asking for permission to share their location. If the visitor doesn't agree to share their location, the geolocation API will call the error handler if you've provided it with one.

The specification says:

"User agents must not send location information to websites without the express permission of the user."

So it's up to the browser to prompt users to inform them that we're trying to grab their current position. Different browsers handle this in different ways. Firefox, for example, offers a nonmodal, non-blocking alert (Figure 9.2). This means your application continues to execute. In fact, currently all desktop browsers ask for permission the same way, in that it doesn't prompt the user with a blocking message.

{{figure 9.2
Figure 9.2 Firefox being asked to share the user's location.
}}

Mobile browsers, including Mobile Safari and Opera Mobile, prompt the user with a modal dialog each time a call is made to the API, stopping all code execution until the user responds (Figure 9.3). Mobile browsers like Firefox Mobile and WebKit on Android do not block the page from running, but still clearly prompt the user for a response.

{{figure 9.3
Figure 9.3 Mobile Safari with a modal dialog, blocking the app from continuing.
}}

## API methods

The geolocation API exists inside the navigator object and contains only three methods:

- `getCurrentPosition`
- `watchPosition`
- `clearWatch`

The `watchPosition` and `clearWatch` are paired methods. They work the same way as `setInterval`, and `setTimeout`. `watchPosition` returns a unique identifier, that can be later cancelled by passing the value to `clearWatch`.

As I mentioned before, `getCurrentPosition` and `watchPosition` mirror each other and take the same arguments:

- success handler
- error handler
- geolocation options

A simple use of the geolocation API would be to just pass a success handler to the `getCurrentPosition` method:

```js
navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(function (position) {
  alert('We found you!');
  // now do something with the position data
});
```

### Got you: the success handler

If the user permits the browser to share his geolocation and there's no other error, the success handler is called, which is the first argument to `getCurrentPosition` and `watchPosition`.

The handler receives a Position object containing two properties: a coords object (containing coordinate information) and a timestamp. The coordinates object is where the interesting stuff is sitting. There are really two grades of data in the position object. The first grade appears in all the browsers with geolocation support:

- `readonly attribute double latitude`
- `readonly attribute double longitude`
- `readonly attribute double accuracy`

Note that accuracy is the measurement of the coordinates' accuracy in meters. You could use this to show a radius of accuracy if you were mapping the user's position.

Although it's difficult to confirm manually, it's likely this data is being provided by the browser vendor's own service. For instance, Google has a big database of location data which-- when combined with information about your request, the hardware, your IP, and a bit of black magic--finds your position. This data simply represents a snapshot of the user's position, and doesn't contain any information that could help you work out their speed, or direction of travel. We'll look at the voodoo magic used to ascertain the visitor's location at the end of this chapter.

Using the coordinate data, you could easily map the user's current position on something like a Google map:

```js
if (navigator.geolocation) {
  navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(function (position) {
      var coords = position.coords;
      showMap(coords.latitude, coords.longitude, coords.accuracy);
  });
}
```

In a lot of applications, it's likely that the user will be offered a manual way to set his current position. If the geolocation method is available, the site may offer the advanced functionality, progressively enhancing the page or the whole experience. An example can be seen at [http://owlsnearyou.com](http://owlsnearyou.com). When visiting the site, if geolocation is available, it reloads the page with your position loaded (Figure 9.4), showing you where you can go owl hunting, if that's the activity that gets you going after a day of HTML5 development. If geolocation isn't available, it simply asks you to enter your location.

{{figure 9.4
Figure 9.4 An example of progressive enhancement using geolocation.
}}

The second grade of data inside the coordinates object is supported, but by default most (currently all) desktop browsers will return null. However, if the device has something like a GPS on board, the values can be determined, at which point the values can be null, 0, or a floating point:

- `readonly attribute double altitude`
- `readonly attribute double altitudeAccuracy`
- `readonly attribute double heading`
- `readonly attribute double speed`

We'll look at how to use this second grade of data next.

### Getting your hands on speed

More and more, we're seeing smartphones, tablets, and notebooks with onboard GPS. On these devices--depending on the specific web browser and OS integration provided--the geolocation API can provide a lot more information than just a one-off set of coordinates (latitude, longitude, accuracy)--instead giving access, through the second-order data, to speed, altitude, and heading information as well.

In most cases, when you make a simple geolocation request, you'll get only the latitude, longitude, and accuracy, and in most cases this is enough for your application.

However, you can get your hands on the speed, altitude, and heading through the geolocation API.

In most cases today, you'll need to tell the API to use highaccuracy to enable the GPS device. Be aware that using the GPS will quickly drain the device's battery, so make sure you're using the technology because you need it, not just because you can.

In order to calculate the current speed, the device needs to average the difference between a series of discrete location measurements (or something to that effect?). For this reason, you'll need to use `geolocation.watchPosition` and update the current speed as it comes in:

```js
var speedEl = document.getElementById('speed');
navigator.geolocation.watchPosition(function (geodata) {
  var speed = geodata.coords.speed;
  if (speed === null || speed === 0) {
    speedEl.innerHTML = "You're standing still!";
  } else {
    // speed is in metres per second
    // multiply by 2.23 to get miles per hour
    speedEl.innerHTML = (speed * 2.23693629) + "Mph";
  }
}, function () {
  speedEl.innerHTML = "Unable to determine speed :-(";
}, {
  enableHighAccuracy: true
});
```

In addition to the speed of the device, you can also get the altitude, altitude accuracy, and heading. If these values aren't available--either because of the device or because the geolocation can't get that particular piece of data--then the returned value will be `null`.

### Geo 404: the error handler

The second argument to the `getCurrentPosition` and `watchPosition` methods is the error handler. This is particularly important if you want to provide some alternative method of location (such as manually) or you want to notify the user of any errors in getting his position. The error handler may trigger if the user denies his position, but it could be that the user has given you permission and you are now watching his position on a mobile device and the phone has gone out of reception. This too would cause the error handler to trigger.

The error handler receives a single argument containing a position error object with two properties:

- `readonly attribute unsigned short code`
- `readonly attribute DOMString message`

The code property will be one of the following:

- `PERMISSION_DENIED` (numeric value 1)
- `POSITION_UNAVAILABLE` (numeric value 2)
- `TIMEOUT` (numeric value 3)

The message property is useful for developing and debugging but wouldn't be appropriate to show the user. It's not because it's some cryptic rubbish from the GPS onboard chips, but because it's bespoke to each browser (as it's not defined in the specification), but also because it's rather computery speak--not friendly to your visitor. The message property isn't always available (as it's not currently in Firefox 3.6+).

To give you an idea of how the error handler can be used, here's a simple example:

```js
if (navigator.geolocation) {
  navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(function (position) {
    var coords = position.coords;
    showMap(coords.latitude, coords.longitude, coords.accuracy);
  }, function (error) {
    var errorTypes = {
      1: 'Permission denied',
      2: 'Position is not available', 3: 'Request timeout'
    };
    alert(errorTypes[error.code] + ": means we can't determine your position");
  });
}
```

If your page uses this code and the user, when prompted, doesn't allow the page access to the current location information, they'll receive a stern alert box "Permission denied: means we can't determine your position."

{{aside

#The alternative error: on success

When I once visited a page that was supposed to detect my location, whilst working from home in Brighton on the south coast of England, the map placed me dead in the centre of London. I checked under

the hood using browser's web console and could see the accuracy

of the geolocation request was set to 140,000 meters--that's about

90 miles of inaccuracy; as a radius that's pretty damn inaccurate! It's understandable how the site wasn't sure exactly where I was. I would strongly recommend that while developing applications that use geolocation you also check the accuracy of the success call. If the accuracy is set to such a large value, it might be worth ignoring the data altogether, treating it the same as an error, and providing your normal fallback mechanisms--such as asking the user to enter his location manually. However, the accuracy is all about context. If your application was helping me to find the closest hospital, I'd expect it to be accurate to about city size. If your application was offering a county view of the current weather system, it would be fine if the accuracy was to 90 miles--as it still puts me in England.

}}

### Configuring the geolocation

Finally, the third argument to both `getCurrentPosition` and `watchPosition` contains the geolocation options. All the geolocation options are optional, as you've seen, and are constructed as follows:

- `enableHighAccuracy` (Boolean, default false)
- `timeout` (in milliseconds, default infinity [represented by 0])
- `maximumAge` (in milliseconds, default 0)

For example, to request high accuracy and a two-second timeout, and to never use old geo data, call `getCurrentPosition` using the following options (where success and error are predefined functions):

```js
navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(success, error, {
  enableHighAccuracy: true,
  timeout: 2000,
  maximumAge: 0
});
```

We already encountered `enableHighAccuracy`--it tells the device to try to get a more accurate reading on the latitude and longitude--`timeout` tells the geolocation lookup how long it should wait before giving up and triggering the error handler. However, it won't start counting down if it's waiting for the user to approve the request. If it does timeout, the error code is set to 3 (`TIMEOUT`). Setting a zero timeout (the current default) tells the browser to never time out and keep trying.

Finally, `maximumAge` tells the browser whether or not to use recently cached position data. If there is a request that is within the `maximumAge` (in milliseconds), it is returned instead of requesting a new position. `maximumAge` can also be Infinity, which

tells the browser to always use a cached position. Setting the `maximumAge` to zero (the default value) means the browser must look up a new position on each request.

{{aside

#How it works under the hood: It's magic

The geolocation API uses a few different techniques in acquiring the user's position. It is black magic to most people, including myself, but it's worth having an idea of what's going on under the hood as it will affect the accuracy of the position data.

GPS is one of the obvious methods for getting position data. More computing devices, ranging from mobile phones to laptops, are being fitted out with GPS. Assuming there's a clear enough line to the GPS ground station (which picks up readings from satellites to triangulate the user's position--yep, more black magic), then you'll have a very accurate reading. GPS can also give you altitude, speed, and heading, which we saw in the second grade of properties in the coordinates object when the high accuracy option was enabled.

Another method is using network information, which would be typical if used via a desktop browser such as Firefox. The network information could use Wi-Fi triangulation and IP addresses to make a best guess at the user's location. The developer makes a call to the browser's geolocation API, which in turn makes a call to a third-party service such

as Skyhook or Google. Although this may be less accurate than GPS,

it could make for a very good backup as GPS doesn't work very well indoors or in high-rise urban locations.

Overall, it's not terribly important to know what makes geolocation tick, but if you need to get the high accuracy, be wary of using the more power-hungry devices such as GPS and of killing your user's battery.

All in all, it's some very cool black magic.



}}

## Summary

If there's any aspect of geolocation in your application, then you'd be a fool not to include this amazingly simple API. The work is virtually zero to implement. Really the work would be in creating the user interface. What's particularly important to me as a developer is that regardless as to how the browser is determining my user's location, it will work the same--whether they're using a desktop machine, laptop, or mobile phone--the code remains exactly the same, and easy.

Since IE9 and all other browsers come with geolocation, support is in a good state. What's more is that we can use polyfill techniques to fall back on to JavaScript-based geolocation using traditional IP lookup services (which you'll see in the polyfill chapter towards the end of this book).

Just remember that geolocation should be used to progressively enhance the page, rather than forcing your user to rely on the data that comes back from the geo-lookup--as it may not be accurate enough for your application.